

10(2236 ) 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Technology (Computer Science & Engineering) 
Credit-Based Scheme of Studies/Examination 
Semester VI (w.e.f. session 2020-2021 ) 
S. 
No. 
Course 
Code 
Subject L:T:P Hours
/Week 
Credits Examination Schedule (Marks) Duratio
n of 
Exam 
(Hrs) 
Major 
Test 
Minor 
Test 
Practical Total 
1 PC-CS-
302 
Complier Design 3:0:0 3 3 75 25 0 100 3 
2 PC-CS-
304 
Computer Networks 3:0:0 3 3 75 25 0 100 3 
3 PEC Elective-II 3:0:0 3 3 75 25 0 100 3 
4 PEC Elective-III 3:0:0 3 3 75 25 0 100 3 
5 OEC  Open Elective-I 3:0:0 3 3 75 25 0 100 3 
6 PROJ –
CS-302 
Project-1 0:0:6 6 3 0 40 60 100 3 
7 PC-CS-
306L 
UNIX and Linux 
Programming Lab 
0:0:4 4 2 0 40 60 100 3 
8 PC-CS-
308L 
Computer Networks 
Lab 
0:0:4 4 2 0 40 60 100 3 
Total  29 22 375 245 180 800  
 
PEC Elective-II PEC Elective-III 
Advanced Computer Architecture: PE-CS-S302 Simulation & Modeling: PE-CS-S310 
Distributed Systems: PE-CS-S304 Mobile Computing: PE-CS-S312 
Fault Tolerant Computing: PE-CS-S306 Unix & Linux Programming: PE-CS-S314 
Mobile Ad-hoc and Wireless Sensor Networks: PE-
CS-S308 
Real Time Systems: PE-CS-S316 
OEC Open Elective-I 
Soft Skills and Interpersonal Communication: OE-CS-
302 
Management Information System: OE-CS-304 
Enterprise Resource Planning: OE-CS-306 
 
Note: Students be encouraged to go to 6-8 weeks summer internships mandatory during the summer 
break after the completion of sixth semester exams. 
 
The  course  of  both  PE  &  OE  will  be  offered  at  1/3
rd
 strength  or  20  students (whichever  is  smaller)  of 
the section.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

10(2237 ) 
 
 
 
 
PC-CS-302 Complier Design 
Lecture Tutorial Practical Credit Major Test Minor Test Total Time 
3 0 0 3 75 25 100 3 Hrs. 
Purpose 
To introduce complier design concepts and their implementation  
Course Outcomes(CO) 
CO1 
To understand the role and designing of a lexical analyzer. 
CO2 
To analyze the role and designing of syntax analyzer or parser. 
CO3 
To identify the role of semantic analyzer and intermediate code generation. 
CO4 
To explore the design importance of optimization of codes and error detection 
 
UNIT I 
 Introduction  to  Language  Processing  System,  Compiling  Analysis  of  the  Source  Program,  Phases  of  a 
Compiler,  Compiler  Construction  Tools.  Lexical  Analysis –Regular  Expression,  Introduction  to  Finite 
Automata  and  Regular  Expression,  Conversion  of  Regular  Expression  to  NFA,  Role  of  Lexical  Analyzer, 
Specification of Tokens.  
UNIT II 
Syntax Analysis: Role of the Parser, Abstract Syntax Trees, Ambiguity in Context-Free Grammars, Types of 
Parsing:- Top  Down  Parsing,  Recursive  Descent  Parsing,  LL  Parser,  Back  Tracking,  Bottom  Up  Parsing, 
SLR Parser, Canonical LR Parser, LALR Parser. 
UNIT III 
Semantic  Analysis  :  Semantic  Errors,  Attribute  Grammar,  Synthesized  attributes,  Static  Allocation,  Stack 
Allocation,  Heap  Allocation,  Activation  Trees,  Symbol  Table,  Intermediate  Code  Generation  and  Code 
Intermediate languages, Declarations, Assignment Statements, Boolean Expressions, Case Statements, DAG 
representation of Basic Blocks, A simple Code generator from DAG, Issues in the Design of Code Generator 
. 
UNIT 1V 
 Code Optimization and Run Time  Environments, Principal Sources  of Optimization, Machine-independent 
Optimization,   Machine-dependent   Optimization,   Optimization   of   Basic   Blocks,   Loop   Optimization   , 
Peephole  Optimization,  Introduction  to  Global  Data  Flow  Analysis,  Storage  Organization,  Static  Storage 
Management, Heap Storage management, Parameter Passing. Error Recovery, Panic mode, Statement mode, 
Global correction. 
 
Suggested Book : 
1. Alfred  Aho,  Ravi  Sethi,  Jeffrey  D  Ullman,  “Compilers  Principles,  Techniques  and Tools”,  Pearson 
Education Asia, 2018. 
2. Allen I. Holub “Compiler Design in C”, Prentice Hall of India, 2003.  
3. C. N. Fischer and R. J. LeBlanc, “Crafting a compiler with C”, Benjamin Cummings, 2003.  
4. V Raghavan , “ Principles of Compiler Design”, Second Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2018.  
5. Henk  Alblas  and  Albert  Nymeyer,  “Practice  and  Principles  of  Compiler  Building  with  C”,  PHI, 
2001.   
6. Kenneth C. Louden, “Compiler Construction: Principles and Practice”, Thompson Learning, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10(2238 ) 
 
 
PC-CS-304 Computer Networks 
Lecture Tutorial Practical Credit Major Test Minor Test Total Time 
3 0 0 3 75 25 100 3 Hrs. 
Purpose 
To introduce the architecture and layers of computer network, protocols used at different 
Layers. 
Course Outcomes(CO) 
CO1 
To understand the basic concept of networking, types, networking topologies and layered 
architecture. 
CO2 
To understand data link layer and MAC sub-layer` 
CO3 
To understand the network Layer functioning 
CO4 
To understand the transport layer and application layer operation 
 
Unit -I 
Introduction  to  Computer  Networks  : Data  Communication  System  and  its  components,  Data  Flow, 
Computer  network  and  its  goals,  Types  of  computer  networks:  LAN,  MAN,  WAN,  Wireless  and  Wired 
networks,  broadcast  and  point-to-point  networks,  Network  topologies,  protocols,  interfaces  and  services, 
ISO- OSI reference model, TCP/IP architecture. 
Physical  Layer:  Concept  of  Analog  &  Digital  Signal,  Bandwidth,  Transmission  Impairments:  Attenuation, 
Distortion,  Noise,  Multiplexing  :  Frequency  Division,  Time  Division,  Wavelength  Division,  Transmission 
Media :  Twisted  pair,  Coaxial  cable,  Fiber  optics,  Wireless  transmission  (radio,  microwave,  infrared), 
Switching:  Circuit  Switching,  Message  Switching  ,Packet  Switching  &  comparisons,  narrowband  ISDN, 
broadband ISDN. 
 
Unit -II 
Data  link  layer:  Error  Control, Types  of  errors,  framing(character  and  bit  stuffing),  error  detection  & 
correction  methods;  Flow  control;  Protocols:  Stop  &  wait  ARQ,  Go-Back- N  ARQ,  sliding  window 
protocols, Selective repeat ARQ, HDLC; 
Medium  access  sub  layer:  Point  to  point  protocol,  FDDI,  token  bus,  token  ring;  Reservation,  polling, 
Multiple  access  protocols:  Pure  ALOHA,  Slotted  ALOHA,  CSMA,  CSMA/CD,  FDMA,  TDMA,  CDMA, 
LLC,  Traditional  Ethernet,  fast  Ethernet,  Network  devices-repeaters,  hubs,  switches,  Bridges,  Router, 
Gateway . 
 
Unit-III 
Network layer:  Addressing : Internet address, sub-netting; Routing techniques, static vs.  dynamic routing , 
routing table, DHCP, IEEE standards 802.x, Routing algorithms: shortest path algorithm, flooding, distance 
vector  routing,  link  state  routing; Protocols:  ARP,  RARP,  IP,  ICMP,  IGMP,  IPV6;  Unicast  and  multicast 
routing protocols, ATM. 
 
Unit-IV 
Transport layer: Process to process delivery; UDP; TCP, RPC, Congestion control algorithm: Leaky bucket 
algorithm, Token bucket algorithm, choke packets; Quality of service: techniques to improve QoS.  
Application  layer:  DNS;  SMTP,  SNMP,  FTP,  HTTP  &  WWW;  Firewalls,  Bluetooth,  Email,  S/MIME, 
IMAP,  
Network  Security:  Cryptography,  user  authentication,  security  protocols  in  internet,  public  key  encryption 
algorithm, digital signatures 
Suggested Books: 
1. Behrouz  A.  Forouzan,  “Data  communication  and  Networking”,  Tata  McGraw  Hill,  Fourth  Edition, 
2011. 
2. Computer Networks, 4th Edition, Pearson Education by Andrew S. Tanenbaum 
1. Larry L.Peterson, Peter S. Davie, “Computer Networks”, Elsevier, Fifth Edition, 2012. 
2. William Stallings, “Data and Computer Communication”, Eighth Edition,Pearson Education, 2007. 
3. James F. Kurose, Keith W. Ross, “Computer Networking: A Top–Down Approach Featuring the 
Internet”, Pearson Education, 2005. 
 

10(2239 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
PC-CS-306L UNIX and Linux Programming Lab 
Lecture Tutorial Practical Credit Minor Test Practical Total Time 
0 0 4 3.0 40 60 100 3 Hrs. 
Purpose 
Experimental knowledge of programming skills with expertisation on Unix/Linux platform 
Course Outcomes(CO) 
CO1 
Learning of simple and advanced commands of Unix /Linux operating systems. 
CO2 
Develop shell programming using Bash or any other shell scripts. 
CO3 
Develop advanced shell programming skills. 
CO4 
Analyzing & evaluation of performance of various c language based programs with the help 
of Make file & debug utilities. 
CO5 
Creation  of  user  accounts,  Learning of  package  installation,  backup  and  shutdown  process 
on Unix /Linux operating systems. 
 
 
List of Practical 
1. Familiarize with Unix/Linux Log In/Log Out and various other commands & vi editor. 
2. Develop simple shell programs using Bash or any other shell in Linux. 
3. Develop advanced shell programs using grep, fgrep & egrep. 
4. Compile and debug various C language based programs using 'makefile' & 'debug' utility. 
5. Learning of installation of dual operating systems with Linux having previously installed  other 
window based operating system. Both OSs should be in working operating mode. 
6. As Supervisor create and maintain user accounts, learn package installation, taking backups,  creation  of 
scripts for file and user management, creation of startup and shutdown scripts using at, batch, cron etc. 
 
 
NOTE : At least 8 to 12 more programs exercises based on Unix/Linux plateform are to be      
assigned by the concerned teacher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10(2240 ) 
 
 
 
 
PC-CS-308L Computer Networks Lab 
Lecture Tutorial Practical Credit Minor Test Practical Total Time 
0 0 4 2 40 60 100 3 Hour 
Purpose To explore networking concepts using Java programming & networking tools. 
Course Outcomes (CO) 
CO1 
Do Problem Solving using algorithms. 
CO2 
Design and test simple programs to implement networking concepts using Java. 
CO3 
Document artifacts using applied addressing & quality standards. 
CO4 
Design simple data transmission using networking concepts and implement. 
 
COMPUTER NETWORKS LAB 
1. Create a socket for HTTP for web page upload and download. 
2. Write a code simulating ARP /RARP protocols. 
3. Study of TCP/UDP performance. 
4. Performance comparison of MAC protocols 
5. Performance comparison of routing protocols. 
6. Write a program: 
a. To implement echo server and client in java using TCP sockets. 
b. To implement date server and client in java using TCP sockets. 
c. To implement a chat server and client in java using TCP sockets. 
7. Write a program: 
a. To implement echo server and client in java using UDP sockets 
b. To implement a chat server and client in java using UDP sockets. 
c. To implement a DNS server and client in java using UDP sockets. 
8. To flood the server from a spoofed source address leading to a DoS attack. 
9. To sniff and parse packets that pass through using raw sockets. 
10. To implement simple calculator and invoke arithmetic operations from a remote client. 
11. To implement bubble sort and sort data using a remote client. 
12. To simulate a sliding window protocol that uses Go Back N ARQ. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10(2244 ) 
 
 
Unit I 
Introduction  to  Mobile Ad  hoc  Networks  (MANET) – Mobility  Management,  Characteristics  and 
Attributes  related  to  MANETs,  Modeling  distributed  applications  for  MANET,  MAC  mechanisms  and 
protocols. 
 
Unit II 
MANET  Routing  Protocols: Ad  hoc  network  routing  protocols,  destination  sequenced  distance  vector 
algorithm,  cluster  based  gateway  switch  routing,  global  state  routing,  fish-eye  state  routing,  dynamic 
source routing, ad hoc on-demand routing, OLSR & TORA routing, location aided routing, zonal routing 
algorithm. 
 
Unit III 
Ad-Hoc  Network  Security:  Link  layer,  Network  layer,  Trust  and  key  management.  Self  policing 
MANET – Node Misbehaviour, secure routing, reputation systems.  
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) : Design Issues, Clustering, Applications of WSN. 
 
Unit IV 
MAC layer and Routing Protocols in WSN 
Data Management:  Retrieval Techniques in WSN, Sensor databases, distributed query processing, Data 
dissemination and aggregation schemes, Operating Systems for WSN, Security issues in WSN. 
 
Suggested Books: 
1 C.  Siva  Ram  Murthy  &  B.S. Manoj,  Mobile  Ad  hoc  Networks – Architectures  &  Protocols, 
Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2004 
2 C  M  Cordeiro&  D.P.  Agrawal,  Adhoc  &  Sensor  Networks – Theory  and  Applications,  ISBN 
981256-682-1, World Scientific Singapore, 2006 
3 C. S. Raghvendra, Wireless Sensor Networks, Springer-Verlag, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PE-CS-S308 Mobile Ad-hoc and Wireless Sensor Networks 
Lecture Tutorial Practical Credit Major 
Test 
Minor Test Total Time 
3 0 0 3 
75 25 
100 3 Hrs. 
Program 
Objective 
(PO) 
To enable students to describe and deal with computer communication and networking, various 
reference models and architectures along with implemented wireless communication techniques 
and various security and privacy parameters are also studied. 
Course Outcomes (CO) 
After completion of course students will be able to 
CO1 
Classify traditional networks and discuss various wireless networking standards, compare and 
contrast various IEEE wireless LAN and Ethernet standards. 
CO2 
Describe cellular architecture and IPv4 and IPv6 header formats has to be discussed along with 
mobile IP. 
CO3 
Recently deployed high performance computing standards, VPN, routing protocols as to be gone 
through. 
CO4 
Various security and privacy standards/tools to be described. 

10(2247 ) 
 
PE-CS-S314  UNIX and Linux Programming  
Lecture Tutorial Practical Credit Major Test Minor Test Total Time 
3 0 0 3 75 25 100 3 Hrs. 
Purpose 
Expertisation in computational programming skills on Unix/Linux Environment. 
Course Outcomes(CO) 
CO1 
Learning  of simple  &  advanced  commands  with  features  and  characteristics  of Unix 
/Linux Systems. 
CO2 
Exploring knowledge of programming development skills using Shell, Filters, editors and 
other utilities. 
CO3 
Analyzing the programming behaviour based on programming development/management 
on Unix /Linux Systems. 
CO4 
Developing  creativity  as  system  administrative  with  networking  expertisation  in  Unix 
/Linux Systems. 
 
 
UNIT I : Unix/Linux Commands with Usages 
History  of  Unix,  Structure  of  Unix  System  &  its  environment,  Unix/Linux  Startup,  User  accounts, 
accessing  Linux – starting  and  shutting  processes, Logging  in  and  Logging  out,  various  types  of  Unix 
Commands, zip, unzip, compress, uncompress, pack, unpack, various types of shells, shell programming, 
Unix  file  system,  Mounting  &  Unmounting  File  System,  Linux/Unix  files,  i-nodes,  files  system  related 
commands,  shell  as  command  processor,  shell  variables,  scripting,  Unix  architecture,  Handling  ordinary 
files, General purpose utilities and advanced Unix Commands. 
UNIT II : Filters and File Compression 
Regular  Expression  and  Filters  :  Introducing  regular  expression  patterns,  syntax,  character  classes, 
Quantifiers,  Bourne  Shell  Programming,  shell  scripting,  grep  :  searching  pattern,  egrep  :  searching 
extended  regular  expression,  Editors  in  Unix/Linux  :  Stream  Editor,  Visual  Editor,  Emac  Editor, 
programming   with   AWK   and   PERL,   File   compression   techniques,   delta   compression,   parallel 
compression with Xdelta utility, data similarities elimination for data reduction. 
UNIT III : Program Development Tools 
The  C  Environment  :  C  language  programming  in  Unix/Linux  using vi  editor  &  C  compiler,  various 
modes  of  vi  editor,  C  compiler  options,  C  Shell  operators,  C  Shell  Script  &  programming,  Program 
Development  Tools,  MakeFile   Utility   for  keeping  program  up-to-date  &  its  use   for   dependency 
calculations,  dynamic  linking  and  loading  of  libraries  modules,  static  and  shared  libraries,  dynamic 
loader, debugging tools like gdb for handling errors, Memory management and managing large projects in 
Unix programming environment. 
UNIT IV : System Administration and Networking 
Processes in  Linux  :  Processes,  starting  and  stopping  processes,  initialization  of  processes,  rc  and  init 
files,  job  control – at,  batch,  cron,  time,  network  files,  security,  authentication,  password  administration, 
signals  handlers,  threading,  Linux  I/O  system,  Networking  tools  :  Ping,  Telnet,  FTP,  Router,  Firewalls, 
Backup and Restore tar, cpio, dd utility, mail command, Unix Network Security. 
Case Study : LINUX Operating System as open source free software. 
 
Suggested Books :  
1. Sumitbha Das : Unix – Concept and Applications, Fourth Edition TMH, 2015 
2. B.M Harwani, Unix and Shell Programming, Oxford University Press, 2013 
3. Neil Matthew, Richard Stones : Beginning Linux Programming, 4
th
. Edition, Wrox-Shroff, 2011. 
4. Welsh & Kaufmann : Running Linux, O’ Reiley & Associates, 2013. 
 
 
    

10(2249 ) 
 
OE-CS-302 Soft Skills & Interpersonal Communication 
Lecture Tutorial Practical  Credit Major Test Minor Test Total Time 
3 0 0 3 75 25 100 3Hrs. 
 Course Outcomes (CO) 
CO1 Develop basic understanding of Communication. 
CO2 Understand the process of communication and speaking. 
CO3 Develop the Personality concepts and its implementation. 
CO4 Develop the basic of group Discussion and interview. 
 
UNIT-I 
Communication: Introduction  Verbal,  Types  of  communication,  extra  personal    communication,  inter 
personal    communication,    intrapersonal     communication,     mass    communication,    Creativity     in 
communication,  Role  of  communication,  flow  of  Communications  and  its  need,    Speaking  Skills,    Main 
features of speaking skills. 
 
UNIT-II 
Barriers in the way of communication, noise, inter personal barriers, intrapersonal barriers, organizational 
barriers,  Extra  personal  barriers, Basics  of  communication: importance  of  communication,  process of 
communication, objectives and characteristics of communication.  
 
UNIT-III 
Personality  Development,  what  is  personality?  Role  of  personality,  Heredity,  Environment,  situation, 
Basics  of  personality, Soft  skills: Need  and  training.  Activity  in  soft  skills, Organizational  skill: 
introduction and its need, basics principles for organization skills.  
 
UNIT-IV 
Group discussion: Group discussion, form of group discussion, strategy for group discussion, discussing 
problem  and  solution,  Oral  presentation,  introduction,  planning,  Occasion,  purpose,  Modes  of  delivery, 
Resume  making: Purpose  of  Resume,  Resume    design  and  structure,  contents    in  Resume,  types  of 
Resume,  job  interview, introduction, objective  of Interview, types  of interview, stages of interview, Face 
to face interview and campus interview. 
 
Suggested Books: 
1. Technical Communication Principles and Practice by Meenakshi Raman and Sangeeta Sharma by 
Oxford Publication. 
2. Personality Development and soft skills by Barun K. Mitra ,Oxford Publication. 
3. Communication Skills For Engineers by C. Muralikrishna and Sunita  Mishra , Pearson Pub. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 