

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 1 
 
 
 Environment: Environment  is  derived  from  the French word Environner, which  means  to 
encircle  or  surround. Environment  is  defined  as  the  sum  total  of  water,  air,  land  and  the  inter-
relationships  that  exist  among  them  and  with  the  human  beings,  other living  organisms  and 
materials. 
 Multi-disciplinary nature of environmental Science 
Environment is complex and has multifarious aspects. 
Environmental  sciences  deal  with  working  of  earth,  its  life  support  systems,  its  interactions, 
influences,  its problems, solutions. Keeping  in  view the complex  nature of environment knowledge 
and  information  from  various disciplines of science, social science,  law and engineering have to be 
included in environmental studies to understand it completely. 
 Life  sciences like  botany,  zoology,  microbiology, genetics  and  bio  technology etc help  in 
understanding the biotic components and their interactions. 
 Physical   sciences like   physics,   Chemistry,   Earth   Science, Oceanography etc   help   in 
understanding  physical  and  chemical structure of abiotic components of  environment  along  with 
mass and energy transfer. 
 Mathematics, statistics, computer science serve as effective tools in environmental modeling. 
 Subjects like economics, management and sociology provide the inputs for dealing with the socio 
economic aspects associated with various developmental activities. 
 Civil  engineering,  Nanotechnology,  Chemical  engineering provides  technical  solutions  to 
environment pollution control and waste management. 
 Environmental  laws provide  the guidelines  and  legal  measures  for  effective  management  and 
protection of environment. 
 Environmental  education  and  mass  communication are  two  important  subjects  that  are 
instrumental in disseminating environmental awareness. 
 Environmental ethics provide the guidelines for sustainable life style. 
 
Environmental  Sciences,  therefore,  is  a  multi-disciplinary  subject  where  we  deal  with  different   
aspects using holistic approach.  
 
 Scope of environmental Sciences 
Environment is  not a single subject;  it is an integration of several subjects that include both science 
and social studies. To understand all the different aspects of our environment, we need to understand 
biology,  chemistry,  physics,  geography,  resources  management,  economics,  and  population  issues. 
Thus,  the  scope  of  environmental  studies  extremely  wide  and  covers  some  aspects  of  nearly  every 
major discipline. They may be summarized as follows 
 Natural resources-their conservation and management 
 Ecology and management 
 Environmental pollution and control 
 Social issues in relation to development and environment 
 Human population and environment 
These are the basic aspects of environmental studies which  have a direct relevance to every section 
of the society 
Environmental Sciences can also be highly  specialized concentrating on more technical aspects like 
environmental engineering and environmental management etc 
In recent years the scope of the subject is  increased dramatically world over. Several career options 
have emerged in this field.  

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 2 
 
 
 
They are categorized as 
 Research & Development (R&D) in environment: Environmental personnel have a key role to 
play  in  examining  various  environmental  problems  and  to  carry  out  R  &  D  activities  for 
developing eco-friendly technologies. 
 Green  advocacy: In  order  to  deal with  cases  related  to  environment, there  is  a  need  of 
environmental lawyers. 
 Green marketing: Environmental auditors and managers have a key role to ensure the quality of 
products. Environmental friendly products are  given ISO 14000 certification or eco mark 
 Green  media: To  create  environmental  awareness  through  media,  environmentally  educated 
persons are required. 
 Environmental consultancy: Non-governmental    organizations,    industries    are    engaging 
environmental consultants for tackling environment related problems. 
 
 Importance and need of Public awareness for environment 
 
  Environmental studies is very important because 
 Environmental  studies  deals  with  most  mundane  problems  of  life where  each  individual 
matters  like  dealing  with  safe  and  clean  drinking water,  hygienic  living  conditions,  clean  and 
fresh air, fertile land, healthy food and sustainable development. 
 Environment is one subject that is actually global as well as local in nature: It has been well 
recognized  that  environment  issues  like  global  warming  and  ozone  depletion,  acid  rain,  marine 
pollution and biodiversity are not merely  national issues but are global  issues and hence  must be 
tackled with international efforts and cooperation.  
 There  are  some  environmental  problems  which  are  of  localized  importance. e.g.  Impact  of 
mining or hydro-electric project in an area, problems of disposal and management of solid waste, 
river and lake pollution, soil erosion, water logging and salinity of soil, fluorosis problem in local 
population etc. For dealing with local environmental issues we have to think and act locally. 
    It is absolutely essential to create awareness about environment because- 
 Environment  belongs  to  all  and  is  important  to  all: Whatever  is  the  occupation  or  age  of  a 
person, he will be affected by environment and also he will affect the environment by his deeds. 
 Problems  due  to  Wake  of  Development: Development, in  its wake gave  birth to Urbanization, 
Industrial Growth, Transportation Systems, Agriculture and Housing etc. However, it has become 
phased out in the developed world.  
  Explosively  Increase  in  Population: World  census  reflects  that  one  in  every  seven  persons  in 
this planted  lives  in India. Evidently with 16 per  cent of the world's population and only 2.4 per 
cent of its land area, there is a heavy pressure on the natural resources including land.  
 Rapidly  changing  technologies  lead  to abandoned  wastes: In the  modern  era  of  development 
there  is  a  greater  inclination  for  adopting  latest  product  of  technological  advancement  and 
discarding the older one as obsolete. Example: Cars, mobile phones, computers, i-pads, electronic 
goods adding lot of e-waste. 
 Our  fast  and  energy  demanding  life  style  pollutes  the  environment: To people  have  become 
increasingly dependent on machines to get the work done fast and make life more comfortable for 
us. But all these machines are energy demanding. Over dependence on machines not only increase 
resource depletion  but also directly or indirectly affect our health. Example: The radiations  from 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 3 
 
mobile towers, cell phones, toxic gases released  from  industries, polluted water etc can seriously 
affect human health. 
 Crazy   consumerism   leads   to   environmental   degradation: There  is  a  sharp  increase  in 
consumerism. With  increasing  buying  capacity  people  have  started over  consumption. It  is  good 
to  have  a  good  standard  of  living  but  the  wasteful  life  style  of  people  leads to  environmental 
degradation. 
 The earth has a definite capacity to tolerate pollutants and sustain populations. Beyond that 
earth  cannot  assimilate  wastes  and  support  life.  It  is  very  important  that  everyone  should  know 
about how earth’s life supporting system works, what  is the  structure of  its  system, what are the 
principles on it works etc. 
 The goals of sustainable development cannot be achieved by any government at its own level 
until  the  public  has  a  participatory  role  in  it. Public  participation  is possible  only  when  the 
public  is  aware  about  the  ecological  and  environmental  issues. The  public  has  to  be  educated 
about the  fact that if we are degrading our environment we are actually  harming our own selves. 
This  is because we are a part of the complex network of environment where every  component is 
linked up.  
 It is very important to make people aware about the harmful effects of environmental pollution on 
human health and they should know how their activities influence the environment. 
 Environmental  Concern at  International Level: Environmental  issues  received  international 
attention  about  45  years  back  in  Stockholm  conference,  held  on  5
th
 June,  1972.  Science  then  we 
celebrates World Environment Day on 5
th
 June.   
Earth Summit-Rio de Janeiro 1992 
World summit-Johannesberg 2002 
 Nobel Peace prize  2004 - Wangari Mathai- green belt movement 
 Nobel   Peace   prize 2007 - Dr.   R.   K.   Pachauri(India) and   US   Vice-president   AI   Gore -
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
 Environmental Concern at National Level: 
 Mrs. Indira Gandhi – Concept of environmental protection  
 Mrs.Menaka Gandhi – Wild life protection.  
 Justice Kuldeep  Singh-the Green  Judge who gave  directives to  Indian  Government to make all 
curricula environment-oriented. 
 M.C. Mehta- the green advocate-filed a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) vs. Union of Indiato give 
a mandate for creating environmental among all citizens of India. 
 Sh. Rajender Singh (Magasaysay awardee) - Water Man of India -water conservation   
 Sh. Sunderlal Bahuguna - “Chipko Movement” and “Tehri Bachao Andolan”. 
 Smt .Medh Patkar and Ms.Arundhati roy-Narmada Bachao Andolan 
  India  has  introduced  a  concept  of  eco-labeling  of  consumers  products  as  eco-mark  i.e 
earthen pitcher 
 There  is  a  Chinese  proverb  for  environmental  protections  as “If  you  plan  for  year  plant  rice,  if 
you  plan  for  10  years  plant  tree  and  if  you  plan  for  100  years  educate  all” This  indicates  the 
importance  of environmental education for the well being of the nation and universe. 
 “What is the use of beautiful building as there is no place to put it on planet” 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 4 
 
                                                  If we want to live in a clean, healthy, aesthetically beautiful, safe and 
secure environment  for a  long time  and wish to hand over the same to our children, grand children 
and great grand children, it is most essential to understand the basics of environment. 
 
 
 
 
NATURAL RESOURCES: 
Any  stock or reserve that can be drawn  from nature is a natural resource. Natural resources are two 
kinds. 
Renewable resources: These are in exhaustive and can be regenerated within a given span of time. 
E.g. Forests, wind energy, biomass energy etc. 
Non renewable  resources: These  are  exhaustive  and  cannot  be  regenerated  within a  given  span  of 
time. 
E.g. Fossil fuels like coal, petroleum, natural gas 
 
FOREST RESOURCES: 
 Major uses of forests 
Forests have its own Commercial and Environmental uses. 
 Commercial uses- raw materials like timber, pulpwood, ply wood, wax, fuel wood, rubber, gum, 
sediments, minerals, drugs, medicines, fruits, beverages, resins, non edible oils, railway sleepers, 
packing materials   etc. 
 Half of the timber cut each year is used as a fuel for heating and cooking 
 One third of the wood harvest is used  for building materials as  lumber, plywood and hardwood, 
particle board and chipboard. 
 One sixth of the wood harvest is converted into pulp and used for paper industry. 
 Many  forest lands are used for mining, agriculture, grazing, and recreation and for development 
of dams. 
A  typical  tree  produces  commercial  goods  worth  about  Rs.30,000/- where  as  provides  ecological 
services worth more than Rs.10,00,000/- 
 Ecological uses- 
 Production  of  Oxygen- trees produce oxygen by photosynthesis and are considered as earth’s 
lungs. 
 Reducing  Global  warming- the  main green  house gas CO
2
 is absorbed  by the  forests as a raw 
material  for  photosynthesis.  The  forest  canopy  acts  as  sink  for  CO
2
 gas  and  controls  Global 
warming. 
 Wildlife habitat- forests are homes for about 7 million species of flora and fauna. 
 Regulation  of  hydrological  cycle- forest watershed acts  as  big  sponges, absorbing rainfall, 
slowing down runoff  and slowly releasing the water for recharge of springs. Moisture in the air 
also helps in evapo-transpiration. 
 Soil conservation- Forests bind the soil particles tightly with their roots and prevent soil erosion. 
They also acts as wind-breaks and controls soil-erosion. 
 Pollution  moderator- Forests can  absorb  toxic  gases  and  keeps  air  pure.  They  prevent  air  and 
noise pollution. 
Deforestation, major causes and consequences:  
Deforestation- Large scale cutting down of trees in the forests is known as deforestation.  

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 5 
 
Major causes for deforestation are- 
1. Shifting  cultivation- practice  of  slash  and  burn  agriculture  and  clearing forests  for  shifting 
cultivation. 
2. Fuel  requirements- increasing demands  of  fuel  wood  by  the  growing  population  and 
increasing the pressure on the forests.  
3. Raw  material  for  industrial  use-wood,  plywood,  timber,  pulp,  rubber  is  some  of  the  raw 
materials  used  to  manufacture  goods.  These  materials  are  extracted  from  forests  on  a  large 
scale. 
4. Development  projects- Major  projects  like  hydroelectric  power,  dams,  road  construction, 
mining etc are creating massive destruction of forests. 
5. Growing food needs- to meet the demand for food from the growing population, agricultural 
lands and settlements are created by clearing forests. 
6. Over grazing-poor people depend on wood as a fuel leading to loss of tree cover and cleared 
lands turns into grazing lands. Overgrazing by cattle also leads to degradation of these lands.  
7. Commercial  logging: which  supplies  the  world  market  with  woods  such  as  teak  destroys 
trees as well as opening up forest for agriculture. Cutting of trees for fire wood and building 
material, the  heavy lopping of  foliage  for fodder and  heavy grazing of saplings  by domestic 
animals like goats. 
8. The cash crop economy: Raising cash crops for increased economy. 
9. Forest fires- they may be natural or manmade. 
 
Major consequences- 
1. It threatens the existence of wildlife due to destruction of natural habitat. 
2. Biodiversity is lost and genetic diversity is eroded. 
3. Hydrological cycle gets effected and affects rainfall. 
4. Soil fertility will be lost due to soil erosion 
5. In hilly areas, it leads to landslides. 
6. Capacity to absorb carbon dioxide decreases and the rate of global warming increases. 
WATER RESOURCES: 
What is an aquifer? Mention its types. 
Aquifer- it is a layer of sediment or rock that is highly permeable and contains water.  Eg:-Layers of 
sand and gravel are good aquifers crystalline rocks are not because they have low permeability.  
It is of two types- 
1. Unconfined Aquifer- they are overlaid by permeable earth materials and they are recharged 
by water going down from above in the form of rainfall and snow melt. 
2. Confined  aquifer- they  are  sand-wiched  between  two  impermeable  layers  of  rock  or 
sediments and are recharged in areas away from the well under the ground. 
 
 Effects  of  ground  water  usage- Excess  usage  of  ground  water  without  recharge,  creates  the 
following problems 
1. Subsidence- when the rate of withdrawal  is  increasing without recharge of water table, then 
the  sediments  in  the  aquifer  gets  compacted.  This  phenomenon  is  called  ground  water 
subsidence. It creates structural damage in buildings, fractures in pipes, reversing the flow of 
canals and tidal flooding. 
2. Lowering of water table- mining of ground water is carried out in few areas for irrigation of 
crop fields. It causes a sharp decline in agricultural production due to decrease in water table. 
It also decreases soil fertility. 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 6 
 
3. Water –logging:- over irrigation causes excess water to accumulate underground and forms 
a  continuous  column  with  the  water  table.  Due  to  this  the  pores  present  on  the  top  soil, 
through  which  the  soil  exchange  the  gases,  will  be  drenched  with  water  and  soil-air  gets 
depleted. This process is known as water-logging. It causes- 
 Increase in water table level and roots of the plants do not get sufficient air for respiration.  
 Mechanical strength of the soil declines and crop yield fails. 
It can be controlled by- 
 Preventing excess irrigation. 
 Sub-surface drainage technology 
 Bio-drainage with trees like eucalyptus 
 
 BIG DAMS-BENEFITS & PROBLEMS 
BENEFITS OF DAMS 
Ecological: 
 Reduction of floods and famines 
 Promotion of productivity in lower areas 
Socio economic: 
 Employment 
 Generating electricity 
 Drinking water supply 
 Irrigation water supply  
 Promotion of Navigation and fishery  
PROBLEMS OF DAMS  
Ecological: 
 Deforestation and loss of bio diversity 
 Water logging and salinity 
 Flashfloods 
 Change in water flow and siltation 
 Reservoir induced seismicity(RIS) 
Socio economic: 
 Submergence of villages and fertile lands 
 Displacement of nativepeople 
 Resettlement issues 
 Outbreak of vector borne diseases 
 
Dams may face problems upstream or downstream as listed below:  
Upstream problems 
1. Displacement of tribal people 
2. Loss of non-forest land 
3. Loss of forests, flora and fauna 
4. Landslides, sedimentation and siltation occurs 
5. stagnation and water logging around reservoirs retards plant growth 
6. Breeding of vectors and vector-borne diseases 
7. Reservoir Induced Seismicity (RIS) causes earthquakes 
8. Navigation and aquaculture activities can be developed in the dam area 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 7 
 
Downstream problems 
1. Water logging and salinity due to over irrigation 
2. Reduced water flow and silt deposition in rivers 
3. Salt intrusion at river mouth 
4. Since the sediments carrying nutrients gets deposited in the reservoir, the fertility of 
the land along the river gets reduced 
5. Due to structural defects or faulty design of the dam may cause sudden dam failure 
leading to collapse and destruction to life and property. 
  
 
FOOD RESOURCES: 
 Environmental impact of modern agriculture –fertilizer and pesticides- 
To  meet  the  growing  demand  for  food  supply  due  to  increase  in  population,  there  is  a  tremendous 
increase in the food production and it is a result of “Green revolution”.  It makes use of hybrid seeds, 
single  crop  vegetation,  using  high-tech  equipments  and  lots  of  energy.  Simultaneously,  it  gave  a 
negative impact on environment. They are as follows- 
1. Impacts  of  HYV  (High  Yield  varieties) - it  includes  monoculture  method,  i.e.  the  same 
genotype  is  grown over  vast  areas. If  any  pathogen  attacks the  crop,  large  scale  devastation 
of crops takes place.  
2. Fertilizer related problems- 
 Micronutrient imbalance- excess use of fertilizer, which include N,P, K as nutrients, causes 
imbalance  in  the  soil  of  the  crop.  For  example- excess  use  of  fertilizer  in  Punjab  caused 
imbalance of Zn in the soil and it is affecting the productivity. 
 Nitrate  pollution- if  Nitrogen  based  fertilizers are  used  more  than  required,  the  excess 
nitrates  gets  leached  into  the  deep  soil.  These  nitrates  if  crosses  the  permissible  limits  of 
25mg/L  in  ground  waters,  it  causes  a  health  hazard  called- “Blue  Baby  syndrome”  or 
methaemoglobinemia. This disease causes effects in infant growth. 
 Eutrophication- it  is  a  process  which  increases  the  salinity  of  the  water  bodies  by  over 
nourishment  due  to  excess  percentage  of  N,  P  fertilizers  accumulated  through  the  water 
runoff. It causes a linked ecological problem. 
 Eutrophication               Increase in algal blooms in water bodies              Completes  life 
cycle  very fast & die                      Dead matter consumes more DO in water  during 
decomposition                        Decrease  in  DO  effects  floura  &  fauna                     Develops 
Anaerobic  conditions.                           Only  pathogenic  bacteria  survives  killing  other 
organisms            Food chain in Aquatic ecosystem will be in threat 
3. Pesticide  related  problems- In  agriculture,  first  generation  pesticides  includes- Sulphur, 
arsenic,  mercury,  lead  etc.  DDT  (Dichloro  diphenyl  trichloroethane)  existed  as  a  second 
generation  pesticide.  It  was  surpassed  due  to  its  hazards  and  later  in  1940s  synthetic 
pesticides came into existence. Following are the pesticide related problems- 
 Super-Pests- The  pest  which  survive  and  are  immune  even  after  pesticide  spray  are 
known  as  super  pests.  This  resistance  to  pesticides  by  the  pests  gives  rise  to  highly 
resistant generations. 
 Some of the pesticides may kill the non-target pests along with the target pests.  
 Biological  magnification- It  is  a  process  in  which  the  concentration  of  the  non-
biodegradable material or pesticide accumulates in the food chain.  As human beings 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 8 
 
occupy the highest position in the tropic level, they get highly bio-magnified which is 
harmful. 
4. Water-logging- over  irrigation causes excess water to accumulate underground and  forms a 
continuous column with the water table. Due to this the pores present on the top soil, through 
which  the  soil  exchange  the  gases,  will  be  drenched  with  water  and  soil-air  gets  depleted. 
This process is known as water-logging. It causes- 
 Increase  in  water  table  level  and  roots  of  the  plants  do  not  get  sufficient  air  for 
respiration.  
 Mechanical strength of the soil declines and crop yield fails. 
It can be controlled by- 
 Preventing excess irrigation. 
 Sub-surface drainage technology 
 Bio-drainage with trees like eucalyptus. 
5. Salinity  problem- evaporation  of  excess  waters  used  for  agriculture  causes  precipitation  of 
salts on the top soil. It creates salinity problem  in the soils. Saline soils are characterized by 
accumulation  of  soluble  salts  like  sodium  chloride,  sodium  sulphate,  calcium  chloride, 
magnesium chloride etc. these sodic salts also increases the pH of the soils and decreases the 
soil fertility. 
It can be controlled by- 
 Using good quality water. 
 Underground network of drainage pipes for flushing out the salts. 
 Sub-surface  drainage  system  is  being  controlled  by  CSSRI- central  soil  salinity 
research institute. 
 
ENERGY RESOURCES: 
A source of energy is an important resource to generate power. Energy sources are of two types- 
1. Renewable resources- a source which can be regenerated continuously in nature and are 
inexhaustible.  
Eg:- Solar energy, wind energy, tidal energy, hydropower, ocean thermal energy, geothermal 
energy, biomass energy, biogas, biofuels, hydrogen etc. 
2. Non-renewable resources- a source which on consumption cannot be regenerated on 
exhausted.  
Eg:- coal, petroleum, nuclear fuels etc. 
RENEWABLE SOURCES OF ENERGY- 
SOLAR ENERGY-  
 Solar energy can be harnessed by means of a photovoltaic cell.  
 It converts solar energy into electrical energy.  
 It is one of the cleanest form of energy to generate power.  
 India is now moving fast in this area to meet the power demand as part of MAKE IN INDIA. 
 A  typical  solar  cell  consists  of  a  semiconducting  material  like  Silicon  or  germanium  doped 
significantly with Boron or Phosphorous.  
 Gallium arsenide or cadmium sulphide are some of the materials used in the PV cells.  

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 9 
 
 Solar  cells  are  used  in  calculators,  electronic  watches, traffic  signals,  water  pumps  etc. they 
are  also  used  in  artificial  satellites for  electricity  generation.  They  are  more  used  in  remote 
areas where conventional electricity supply is rare. 
 In Andhra Pradesh, Tirumala tirupathi devasthanam (TTD) is using a large solar power plant 
to generate power. It is used for cooking food on a large scale for the pilgrims. 
 Other devices which harness solar energy are solar cookers, solar heat collectors, solar water 
heaters, solar furnace, solar power plants etc. 
 
WIND ENERGY-  
 High speed winds have a lot of energy in them as kinetic energy due to their motion. 
  The driving force for these winds is sun. And the wind energy is harnessed by wind mills. 
 The blades of wind mill keep on rotating due to the fore of the wind of speed 15km/hr.  
 the rotational motion of the blades drives a number of machines like water pumps, flour mills 
and electric generators.  
 A  large  number of wind  mills  are  installed  in cluster called wind  farms.  At present, India  is 
generating about 1100 MW of electricity. 
 Kanyakumari in TamilNadu is generating 380 MW of electricity. 
 
HYDROPOWER-  
 Water  flowing  in  a  river  is  collected  by  constructing  a  big  dam  where  water  is  stored  and 
allowed to flow from a height.  
 The blades of the turbine  located at the bottom of the dam  move with the fast moving water 
which in turn rotate the generator and produce electricity.  
 The hydropower potential of India is around 4 x 10
11
 KWhours. 
 Top five countries in generating hydropower are China, Canada, Brazil, US, Russia. 
 Nagarjuna sagar is one of the major hydropower projects in Andhra Pradesh. 
 
TIDAL ENERGY-  
 Tides  are  produced  by  gravitational  forces  of  sun  and  moon  and  contain  high  amount  of 
energy.  
 The high tide and low tide refer to the rise and fall of water in the oceans. 
  A difference of several meters is required between the height of high and low tide to spin the 
turbines.  
 The tidal energy is harnessed by constructing a tidal barrage.  
 During, high tide, the sea-water flows  into the reservoir of the barrage and turns the turbine 
and rotates the motor in the generator to produce electricity.  
 During  low tide, the sea  level  is  low and the water stored in the reservoir  flows out into the 
sea level and again turns the turbine. Canada, France are using this form of energy. 
OCEAN THERMAL ENERGY- 
 The  energy  available  due  to  the  difference  in  temperature  of  water  at  the  surface  of  the 
tropical oceans and at deeper levels is called Ocean Thermal Energy (OTE).  
 A difference of 20-25 C is required between surface water and deeper water of the ocean for 
operating OTE.  
 The warm surface water of ocean is used to b oil a liquid like ammonia.  

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 10 
 
 The  high  pressure  vapors of  the  liquid  formed  by  boiling  are  used to turn the turbine  of  the 
generator and produce electricity.  
 The colder water from the deeper ocean is pumped to cool and condense the vapors into 
liquid. Thus the process keeps on going for 24 hours a day. 
  
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY- 
 The energy harnessed from the hot rocks present inside the earth is called geothermal energy. 
 High temperature and high pressure steam fields exist below the earth’s surface.  
 This heat comes from the fusion of radioactive material present in the rock.  
 These plants are found in USA, New Zealand etc. 
BIOMASS- 
Biomass is the organic matter produced by the plants or animals which includes wood, crop residues, 
cattle dung, manure, sewage, agricultural wastes etc. it is of following types- 
a. Energy plantations- certain crops plants of potato, cereals etc may produce energy either by 
burning  or  by  getting  converted  into  burnable  gas  or  may  be  converted  into  fuels  by 
fermentation. 
b. Petro-crops- latex containing plants like oil palms are rich in hydrocarbons and can yield oil 
like substance at high temperature and pressure. This oily material is burnt in diesel engine or 
may be refined as gasoline. These plants are known as petro crops. 
c. Agricultural  and  urban  waste  biomass- crop  residues,  coconut  shells,  agricultural  wastes 
produce energy by burning. 
BIOGAS- 
It  is  a  mixture  of  methane,  carbon  dioxide,  hydrogen  and  hydrogen  sulphide.  It  is  produced  by 
anaerobic  degradation  (breakdown  of  organic  matter  by  bacteria  in  absence  of  oxygen)  of  animal 
wastes in the presence of water.  
 It is non-polluting, clean and low cost fuel. 
 It won’t have any storage problem 
 It is of two types- floating gas-holder type and fixed-biome type. 
 Ministry of Non-conventional energy sources had been promoting Biogas program in India. 
BIOFUELS- 
Biomass  can  be  converted  into  alcohols  like  ethanol  and  methanol.  Ethanol  can  be  produced  from 
carbohydrate rich substances. It burns clean and  non-polluting. Gasohol  is a  mixture of ethanol and 
gasoline (petrol) used in India, Brazil and Zimbabwe. Methanol is also a useful biofuel. 
HYDROGEN AS A FUEL- 
 Hydrogen as a fuel has high calorific value and can serve as an excellent fuel.  
 It is a non-polluting gas and can be produced easily.  
 It can be produced by photolysis of water. 
 It is inflammable and explosive in nature.  
 It is safe to handle and light in nature.  
 It needs to be stored in bulk.  
 It is used a liquid in spaceships. 
 It is also used in hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell as a fuel to generate electricity. 
 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 11 
 
 NON-RENEWABLE SOURCES OF ENERGY- 
COAL- Coal  is  the  most  abundant  fossil  fuel  in the  world.  Ancient  plants  along  the  rivers  will  be 
buried after death into the soil and due to heat and pressure gets converted into peat and coal. 
There  are three types  of  coal  mainly- anthracite, bituminous,  lignite.  Anthracite  coal  has  maximum 
carbon % and highest calorific value.  
It  is  an  important  fuel  to  generate  electricity  in  a  Thermal  power  plant.  About  54% of  electricity  is 
generated  from  thermal  power  plant  which  is  dependent  on  coal  as  the  main  fossil  fuel.  The  main 
drawback of using coal as fossil fuel is the release of gases COx, NOx, SOx into the atmosphere. 
PETROLEUM- it is obtained by fractional distillation of crude oil. It is a cleaner fuel than coal and 
leaves no residue.  
LPG- (liquefied  petroleum  gas)- it  mainly  contains  n-butane  with  minor  fractions  of  propane  and 
ethane. Petroleum gas is converted into liquid form under pressure as LPG. It is an odorless gas and 
an  important  domestic  cooking  fuel.  It  has  foul  smell  due  to  ethyl  mercaptan  gas  added  to  it  to 
identify the leakage. 
NATURAL GAS- 
It is composed of methane (95%) along with propane and ethane. It is present as a layer below crude 
oil  layer  under  the  sea  bed.  It  is  formed  by  the  decomposition  remains  of  dead  animals  and  plants 
buried under the earth. It is transported through pipelines and posses a high calorific value. It is used 
as  a  domestic  and  industrial  fuel.  It  is  used  in  thermal  power  plants  for  generating  electricity.  It  is 
used as a source of hydrogen gas in fertilizer industry and as a source of carbon in tire industry. 
It can be converted into two main forms- 
CNG- Compressed natural gas- it is being used as an alternative to petrol and diesel for transport of 
vehicles. It is produced by compressing natural gas at a high pressure. 
It is majorly used in cities like Delhi, Ahmadabad, Vijayawada etc. 
SNG-Synthetic natural gas- it is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. It is a connecting link 
between a fossil fuel and substituted natural gas. 
NUCLEAR ENERGY- 
Nuclear  energy  is  generated  in  two  different 
forms- 
i. Nuclear   fission- it   is   the   nuclear 
cleavage  of  heavy  nucleus into  two  or 
more  lighter  nuclei  by  the  bombardment 
of  neutrons.  It  releases  high  amount  of 
energy    through    a    sustainable    chain 
reaction. The  reaction  is  carried  out  in  a 
nuclear power plant to generate 
electricity.  
 
           
 
Nuclear fission reaction 
 

UNIT-1 
INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES 
Department of Chemistry, ANITS  Page 12 
 
       Nuclear reactors in India- 
 Kalpakkam nuclear reactor (Tamil Nadu) 
 Kaiga Atomic power plant (Karnataka) 
 Tarapur nuclear reactor (Maharashtra) 
 Pokhran test centre (Rajasthan) 
 Narora nuclear reactor (Uttar Pradesh) 
ii. Nuclear  fusion- It  is  the  process  of  combination  of  two 
lighter  nuclei  to  form  a  heavy  nucleus.  It  releases  high  amount  of 
energy  of  order  10
7
k.  And  they  are  also  known  as  thermonuclear 
reactions.  
    The main criteria to set up a nuclear power plant are- 
a. Geographical  location  of  the  plant  with  clear  idea  on  long  term 
and short term effects. 
b. Proper  disposal  of  the  wastes  from  the  laboratory involving  the 
use of isotopes. 
 
 
 